# Report and mission statement following the workshop "Securing Data in Ancient Mesopotamia: New Technologies for Secured Cuneiform Texts", held at the Lorentz Center 14-18 march 2022

By Rients de Boer, Hubert Mara, Dominique Ngan-Tillard, Dirk Roorda and
Caroline Waerzeggers (scientific organizers), with input of workshop
participants.  

22 April 2022 

## Background 

The  workshop  was  convened  with  a  specific  historical  question  in
mind:  "How  did  ancient Mesopotamian scribes and other text-users protect the
information that they stored on and inside cuneiform clay tablets?" 

The theme was chosen for its potential to bring a wide range of scientific
domains together. In ancient times, clay tablets bearing cuneiform text were
incised, imprinted, encased, wrapped, copied and otherwise manipulated in order
to validate them and to protect them from damage,  forgery and unwanted access.
Text-based scholarship has traditionally focused on the information that was
conveyed through writing, while neglecting the material, cognitive,
technological, and social processes of data control that accompanied the
written text since the dawn of history. Shifting text-based into object-based
investigation of cuneiform clay tablets requires a research strategy that goes
far beyond the methods of text analysis that are traditionally used by
historians, linguists,  philologists  and  epigraphists.  It  requires  a
collaboration  with  archaeologists,  geo- scientists, physicists, computer
scientists and experts from the social, cognitive and applied sciences. The
Lorentz workshop was conceived as a place to bring that expertise into the
conversation and, if successful, to explore future collaborative action. 

While  developing  the  workshop's  program  it  became  clear  very  quickly
that  participants experienced the envisioned shift from text-based to
object-based research of the cuneiform tablet as urgent and significant, while
the theme of ancient data security became more of a side topic. We therefore
decided to open up the workshop to contributions that pursued non-textual
research of the clay tablet in general, while letting go of the specific
research question of data security. Lifting  that  theme  proved  liberating;
it  stimulated  conversation  on  a  range  of  different methodologies and
technologies that promise to push our understanding of the cuneiform clay
tablet as an artifact into novel directions.   

## Outcome

During the workshop several areas were identified where collaboration is likely
to produce new knowledge that can bridge significant gaps in the
state-of-the-art or that can improve current methodologies. Detailed reports of
the sessions can be read in the conference proceedings that are deposited in
zenodo, [DOI 10.5281/zenodo.6323315](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6323315).
In the present summary statement, some
avenues for new research, and research collaborations, are highlighted, along
with steps that can be taken towards their realization. 

### 3D imaging and heritage preservation

Optimizing existing 3D imaging techniques (Mara, Homburg) will contribute to a
better digital representation, and preservation, of the surface structure of
clay tablets with its complex incisions (wedges), traces of human use (finger
and hand-palm prints), imprints of contact objects, faded pigments, burn marks,
etc. An additional challenge is to combine data obtained by optical 3D surface
acquisition with 3D volumetric data captured by means of see-through techniques
in order to produce a digital twin that transmits the entire range of
information contained in the clay artifact. It  is  expected  that  perfecting
these  techniques  will  be  beneficial  in  the  area  of  heritage
preservation and protection by creating a "digital twin" holding a wide range
of information enabling the (re)contextualization of tablets. This is
especially relevant for a large number of tablets in all the collections
established decades ago. 

### Ancient finger and handpalm imprints

Bennison-Chapman's keynote on finger-prints, as well as the intervention of the
forensic team, generated much interest. The potential for capturing and
studying ancient imprints, intended as  impressions of 'epidermal ridges' from
the skin of the hand (palm and fingers), is still largely unexplored in the
context of cultural heritage research. Most of the existing studies have
focused on two-dimensional representations and commercial software for image
processing. Identifying demographic patterns such as broadage  (adult/child)
and biological sex  in the use-traces of ancient texts (and non-written
artifacts, like tokens), using both see-through techniques and surface imaging,
has ground-breaking potential. 

### See-through techniques

There was wide agreement among participants that see-through techniques offer
the potential to unlock "secrets" (previously hidden things) contained on the
inside of the clay tablet. One line of research that generates much interest is
the use of clay inclusions as proxy data on the ancient climate, an endeavor in
which Chikako Watanabe's group has booked advances over the past decade. The
continuation of research on enveloping (Michel, Mynarova/Zemanek, De Boer) and
on the manufacturing processes of clay tablets (Michel, Taylor) is also felt to
be important. As previously pointed out, as more and more of the "inside" of
the clay tablet is being explored, there is a need to adapt data storage
systems accordingly. Text annotation and 3D imaging of surface information is
not yet prepared to handle information about the inside of an object (Bruhn,
Mara). 

### Cooperation through the class room

The group expressed interest in exploring cooperation through the class room,
particularly in the area of digital methods and 3D acquisition techniques for
studying cuneiform tablets. As part of this action, we envision the production
and publication of guidebooks, offering "best practices" for the application of
state-of-the-art methodologies. One of the guidebooks could be a modus operandi
for p-XRF data acquisition and utilization to better secure information on the
provenance of clay tablets (van Os, Stratford and Hameeuw together with
Braekmans). Another one could focus on best practices for tablet
conservation and consolidation.  

Funding: exploring the "Erasmus+" network for exchange of students and staff.
Summer schools or  the  (casual)  sharing  of  curriculum  modules  are  a
low-cost  strategy  to  create  bottom-up synergies between members of the
consortium and train researchers of (potential) future projects. The "Marie
Curie Doctoral Network" scheme is interesting but it is too ambitious for a
consortium at our (modest) level of operation. Erasmus Mundus might hold more
promise (joint MA degrees) but is probably quite labor intensive. 

### Archaeology of cuneiform archives

The contextual analysis of tablet groups from archaeological sites is
under-researched and merits renewed scrutiny. A better understanding of the
ancient processes of deposition is required to map the conditions in which we,
in the present-day, encounter the cuneiform "archives" of the past. This
includes studying the effects of destruction, deposition and recycling within
their specific cultures of archive-keeping that emerged, disappeared, and
re-emerged in the ancient Middle East,  and  is  potentially  game-changing.
More  broadly,  the  contexts  in  which  tablets  are discovered offer
exceptional cases to study practices of discard and post-depositional processes
in archaeology. This line of research has also hardly been explored yet.
(Klinkenberg, Prechel, Waerzeggers). Another area of interest is the
incorporation of data pertaining to archaeological stratigraphy and find spot
information in databases of cuneiform texts. Anderson is currently working on
building up a list of properties in Wikibase that can accommodate this type of
(re)contextualization with linked data. 

### The clay tablet as multi-faceted data capsule

An idea for an "umbrella project" consists of setting up a collaborative
project that explores the cuneiform  clay  tablet  as  a  multifaceted  data
capsule  on  the  ancient  human  and  natural environment. Sub-cells in such a
project could consist, e.g., of teams focusing on the inside of the tablets
(see-through techniques, chemical analysis of clay composition, biological
inclusions intentionally added or not), on the study of use- and user-traces
left on the surface (finger and palm imprints, ink traces, 3D imaging
techniques), the archival "condition" of the tablet, the archaeological
context. This also involves bringing the "multifaceted data" together using
linked data URIs. 

## Next steps

As to funding schemes, the following were identified as being suitable for one
or more of the topics outlined above: 

*   COST: for networking between members of the consortium; 
*   Erasmus+, Erasmus Mundus: networking through teaching; 
*   funding for collaborative, transnational projects: 
    *   WEAVE: bi- and trilateral cooperation within Europe;
        several constellations within our group feature among participating countries,
        incl. Germany, Czech Republic and Belgium; 
    *   ERC Synergy 
    *   *DFG Wissenschaftliche Netzwerke*
        (research network funding in Germany allowing to connect
        with 10-20 partners on an international level) 
    *   NEH Collaborative grant (through Adam Anderson) 
*   personal grants through the ERC (Adv, CoG, St), NWO (veni, vidi, vici)
    and smaller fellowships, e.g. Gerda Henkel Stiftung 
*   in the heritage sector, the following schemes can be considered: 
    *   JPICH Cultural Heritage, Society and Ethics
        (researchers from at least 3 countries and one associate partner, e.g. NGO; multidisciplinary research) 
    *   Twinning: increase visibility of research institutes in the local arena 
    *   HORIZON-CL2-2023-HERITAGE-01-03:
        Re-visiting the digitisation of cultural heritage: What, how and why? 
