# Wednesday Q123

## Q1: What new questions can we ask about the ancient Mesopotamian environment thanks to chemical analysis and analyses of micro- and macro-remains in clay tablets?

Notes

Caroline: We need to be careful (viz. Presentation by Watanabe).

Kai: Object biographies!

Make a conceptual model for objects, also including the things that are obvious.

E.g. the source of the clay may be far removed from the source of the clay tablet.

Such a model does not exist yet, but **is needed**

So: which kind of data on object do we need to collect, which quantity, which quality, how to store it so it can be re-used.

Now we have a huge collection in many inventories, but they are about a limited geographic area.

There is potential, and there are limits. Data tells a story about a local situation. Understanding local situations helps to understand new data in turn.

We need good case studies.

Neutron imaging: (dis)balance between costs and results: can we do 100s of tablets with neutron imaging? (especially since they seem to produce similar results to x-rays?)

In order to scale this, we need a project with dedicated funds.

Top-down vs bottom-up:

Research questions at the top ask for data.

Data turns out to be complicated, or tell an ambiguous story.

Then we need to collect more data in order to try to solve those problems.

That’s where bottom-up comes in.

For that a data-infrastructure is needed, so that the interplay between research questions and available data can take off.

The cuneiform community is in the middle of many “independent” technological expertises, and in the process of making sense of them, and seeing which are the key methods to get helpful data.


## Q2: What new questions can we ask about data security in ancient Mesopotamia thanks to surface scanning techniques?

Hendrik: if you choose one technique, could it exclude applying another technique? E.g. culd neutron scanning hamper CT scanning? We need a protocol: least invasive methods first.

Can this be coordinated? Otherwise we might lose information.

This also opens the box of ethical considerations.

Document the object life (which curational operations has it undergone?). We need a metadata scheme for that.

[added: See order of analyses proposed by Matthias: thermoluminescence for dating before p-XRF and mCT.]

[added: See also tips to avoid damage related to X-ray radiation (in bones): Immel 2016, Scientific Reports. Scientific **Reports **| 6:32969 | DOI: 10.1038/srep32969

No ancient DNA found so far in tablets? No hair/saliva from the scrib ever found, I suppose.]

Starting research from a collection versus starting from a research question. (a bit like bottom-up vs top-down above).

Many researchers have started from corpora, but there should be more vision behind it, because rarely existing corpora “as they are” can answer challenging research question. 


## Q3: What else would we like to capture but cannot yet with these digitization techniques?

Notes

