<!-- Output copied to clipboard! -->


# Monday Q1



* **Q1: What new questions can we ask about clay preparation and tablet manufacture thanks to see-through techniques?**
* Q2: What new questions can we ask about the use of clay envelopes in ancient Mesopotamia thanks to see-through techniques?
* Q3: What else would we like to see but cannot yet see with these CT techniques?
* Q4: How do enveloping, clay preparation, tablet manufacture, breaking etc. relate to the problem of securing data?


# Answers to Q1

Group A (Common Room, in Person)



* Neutron, CT-Scan-Technology
    * Information on the composition of elements in the clay
    * only tested on one tablet in 2019
    * Data from this and x-ray can be combined
* Questions about
    * Environment (salt composition in the clay)
        * Objects life since excavation is unclear, might have corrupted information
            * Some tablets were also baked during the excavation  
    * providence
    * Usewear
        * tablets which were in use often should show some wear and tear
    * Production & fashioning for use
    * Datasets need to be sufficiently spread geographically (-> geomapping) and temporally
        * And just need to be bigger than what is available now
    * Local traditions of producing tablets?
    * It seems that what you want is to be able to reverse-engineer tablets/envelope production
        * Maybe reaching out to [https://exarc.net/](https://exarc.net/) could be useful
    * Where is clay sourced from? Locally? Collaborations with local artisanal workshops in current Mesopotamia. How do they work?
        * There are textual sources for that!
* What can archaeology add to the analysis of the context in which the tablets were produced?

Group B (main venue + online)



* How long does it take to produce a tablet? When traveling, on the road: we need to know how the merchants were able to produce tablets on the road. 
    * These questions apply to the Old Ass corpus but also other text groups that were produced by traveling parties on the road: did they take clay along? Did they source it locally? Etc
    * The tablets written during the travels of the Egibis could be used in this way: follow the tablet stream as the people moved through the region
* Similar questions apply (from Cale):
    * (i) public vs private contexts in which clay is being prepared — how much training does a scribe have? OR (ii) a scale for quality of clay or preparation of clay?
    * Even a very simple classification of clay
* How do clay tablets relate to other clay objects from the same site or context (mudbrick, figurines, etc)? Do scribes and artisans share resources or knowledge?
* What’s the difference between high and low quality clay tablets: is the clay itself of a higher/finer quality or has it been processed extensively? Can we say something about the process of cleaning etc. by means of see-through techniques
* Patterns of inclusions in the clay can be picked up by CT scan techniques and these can tell us something about the folding etc. of the clay during tablet manufacture
* Consideration of the chaine operatoire of clay tablets has (archaeologically) been completely neglected (in contrast to other types of artefacts such as pottery etc), so there is a large gap in our knowledge and an open field for research 

All work done so far is anecdotal, we need to raise the scale

